A CASH-FLOW FOCUS  
FOR ENDOWMENTS  
AND TRUSTSCFA INSTITUTE RESEARCH FOUNDATION / BRIEF
JAMES P. GARLAND, CFAAmeritech
Anonymous
Robert D. Arnott
Theodore R. Aronson, CFA
Asahi Mutual Life Insurance Company
Batterymarch Financial Management
Boston Company
Boston Partners Asset Management, L.P.
Gary P. Brinson, CFA
Brinson Partners, Inc.
Capital Group International, Inc.
Concord Capital Management
Dai-Ichi Life Insurance Company
Daiwa Securities
Mr. and Mrs. Jeffrey Diermeier
Gifford Fong Associates
John A. Gunn, CFA
Investment Counsel Association of America, Inc.
Jacobs Levy Equity Management
Jon L. Hagler Foundation
Long-Term Credit Bank of Japan, Ltd.
Lynch, Jones & Ryan, LLC
Meiji Mutual Life Insurance CompanyMiller Anderson & Sherrerd, LLP
John B. Neff, CFA
Nikko Securities Co., Ltd.
Nippon Life Insurance Company of Japan
Nomura Securities Co., Ltd.
Payden & Rygel
Provident National Bank
Frank K. Reilly, CFA
Salomon Brothers
Sassoon Holdings Pte. Ltd.
Scudder Stevens & Clark
Security Analysts Association of Japan
Shaw Data Securities, Inc.
Sit Investment Associates, Inc.
Standish, Ayer & Wood, Inc.
State Farm Insurance Company
Sumitomo Life America, Inc.
T. Rowe Price Associates, Inc.
Templeton Investment Counsel Inc.
Frank Trainer, CFA
Travelers Insurance Co.
USF&G Companies
Yamaichi Securities Co., Ltd.Named Endowments
CFA Institute Research Foundation acknowledges with sincere gratitude the generous contributions of 
the Named Endowment participants listed below. 
Gifts of at least US$100,000 qualify donors for membership in the Named Endowment category, which 
recognizes in perpetuity the commitment toward unbiased, practitioner-oriented, relevant research 
that these firms and individuals have expressed through their generous support of the CFA Institute 
Research Foundation.
For more on upcoming CFA Institute Research Foundation publications  
and webcasts, please visit www.cfainstitute.org/learning/foundation .Senior Research Fellows
Financial Services Analyst AssociationA CASH-FLOW FOCUS  
FOR ENDOWMENTS  
AND TRUSTS
James P. Garland, CFAStatement of Purpose
CFA Institute Research Foundation is a not-for-
profit organization established to promote the 
development and dissemination of relevant 
research for investment practitioners worldwide.
Neither CFA Institute Research Foundation, CFA Institute, nor the publication’s edi -
torial staff is responsible for facts and opinions presented in this publication. This 
publication reflects the views of the author(s) and does not represent the official 
views of CFA Institute Research Foundation.
CFA®, Chartered Financial Analyst®, and GIPS® are just a few of the trademarks owned by CFA 
Institute. To view a list of CFA Institute trademarks and the Guide for the Use of CFA Institute 
Marks, please visit our website at www.cfainstitute.org.
© 2019 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, 
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, 
without the prior written permission of the copyright holder.
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to 
the subject matter covered. It is sold with the understanding that the publisher is not engaged 
in rendering legal, accounting, or other professional service. If legal advice or other expert 
assistance is required, the services of a competent professional should be sought.
Cover credit: Witthaya Prasongsin / Moment / Getty Images
ISBN 978-1-944960-77-3This publication qualifies for 1 CE credit under the guidelines  
of the CFA Institute Continuing Education Program.CONTENTS
Foreword  ............................................................................................................................ v
I. Introduction  .................................................................................................................... 1
II. The Irrelevance of Market Values  ..................................................................................... 1
III. Spending Rules  .............................................................................................................. 4
IV. Change the Spending Rates?  ......................................................................................... 19
V. Intergenerational Equity  ................................................................................................ 22
VI. Conclusion  .................................................................................................................. 27
References  ........................................................................................................................ 28CFA Institute Research Foundation  |  v FOREWORD
Should the Market Values of Endowment Assets Be Used to 
Determine Spending? A Maverick Industry Leader Says No
Laurence B. Siegel
How much should an endowed institution, an 
individual, or a family spend out of its accumu -
lated investments each year? This question has 
been extensively discussed, yet no universally 
agreed-upon answer has emerged. Over the 
past half-century, a general but not universal 
consensus has formed about spending a fixed 
percentage of the investments’ market value or 
of a “rolling” average of recent market values 
(the purpose of the rolling being to reduce the 
volatility of spending).
In this thoughtful essay, James Garland, retired 
chief investment officer of The Jeffrey Company 
and a longtime observer of and participant 
in the markets, questions this consensus. He 
makes the case that spending should be based 
on the assets’ “fecundity, ” a term borrowed from 
biology that indicates how fertile or productive 
the assets are.
More precisely, fecundity is the number of 
“babies” or offspring an animal (or person) is 
expected to produce per unit of time. Rabbits: 
high; elephants: low. In the investment markets, 
fecundity is measured by variables such as the 
yield on a bond, earnings or dividends for a 
stock, and funds from operations for real estate. 
Garland offers variations on these measures in 
an effort to home in on a useful definition of fecundity for the purpose of setting spending 
policy.
THE CONTRASTING RISKS 
OF MARKET VALUE–BASED 
VS. FUNDAMENTAL SPENDING 
RULES
Fecundity is thus a fundamental  variable, not a 
market variable. Using fecundity to set spend -
ing policy ignores the market’s assessment of the 
asset’s value and focuses on the inherent proper -
ties of the asset itself. Using market values versus 
using fundamental values for setting spending 
exposes the portfolio to opposite risks. The risk 
of using market values is overspending when the 
market is high, and the risk of using fundamen -
tal values is overspending when the market is 
low. Which risk would you rather take?
The answer is not obvious. If the market is 
“high”—that is, if the ratio of market prices to 
fundamental values is high relative to histori -
cal norms—then spending a fixed percentage 
of market value is not overspending as long as 
the market remains high. It is just right. Markets 
fluctuate, however, and a market that is high can 
become low with alarming speed, as we saw in FoRewoRd
vi  |  CFA Institute Research Foundation1973–1974, 1987, 2000–2002, and especially 
2007–2009.
Usually, the market bounces back, but a quick 
recovery is not guaranteed, and neither insti -
tutions nor individuals have infinite patience. 
They typically must continue spending in bad 
times as well as good to support the mission of 
the organization (or the lifestyle of the individ -
ual or family). If spending is set at a high dollar 
level during buoyant markets, the ability to cut 
spending to match the decline in market values 
in a severe bear market may be limited—which 
is where the risk of spending based on market 
values comes from. If institutions and fami -
lies could cut spending exactly in proportion 
to  a decline in market values, the risk would 
be greatly reduced—although they might not be 
happy with the spending level!
TALES OF THE FORD 
FOUNDATION
I found out the riskiness of a rigid spending rule 
by watching the Ford Foundation, my one-time 
employer, largely maintain its spending in dol -
lars as market values plunged in four bear mar -
kets.1 It simply could not adhere to a spending 
rule based on a fixed percentage of market value 
and continue to fulfill its substantive mission—
giving money to charity and supporting social 
programs.
In the very worst instance, the Ford Foundation 
spent 14.4% of its shrunken capital base in 1974, 
which almost led to a decision by its trustees to 
spend the rest of the assets and close the foun -
dation. Thankfully, our fearless leader, Franklin 
Thomas, who took office shortly after this 
1I was director of research (among other titles) in the 
investment division of the Ford Foundation from 1994 to 
2009. Pre-1994 information was obtained through contact 
with older and wiser foundation executives.debacle, imposed draconian spending cuts, and 
the foundation survived to fight another day. 
Enjoying the subsequent bull markets, it grew to 
the $12.5 billion institution it is today.2
SOME HISTORY: BARKER 
AND BUNDY TELL ENDOWED 
INSTITUTIONS TO BUY EQUITIES
That this history happened to the Ford 
Foundation is ironic because the foundation 
led the drive to base spending on market values 
in the first place. In a report to the foundation 
called “Managing Educational Endowments, ” 
investment manager and trustee Robert R. 
Barker (not Bob Barker, the game show host) 
responded to a call by then Ford Foundation 
president McGeorge Bundy (yes, the former US 
National Security Advisor and dean of Harvard 
College) to study ways of changing the invest -
ment policies of endowed institutions.3 In the 
landmark 1969 Barker Report, the founda -
tion and endowment community was advised 
to invest for growth (in stocks) rather than for 
income (in bonds) and, secondarily, to base 
annual spending on market values (e.g., by 
spending a fixed percentage of a three-year roll -
ing average of the portfolio’s market values).
Coming from what was then the world’s larg -
est foundation, the Ford Foundation report 
2Although the Ford Foundation was much larger (about 
$30 billion in today’s money) at its mid-1960s peak, it has 
given away $17 billion (again, inflation adjusted) between 
then and now, so the shrinkage over time is not necessar -
ily a bad thing. The Ford family provided the money to be 
used for charitable purposes, not to be conserved forever.
3An excellent summary of this history is in Lawrence E. 
Kochard and Cathleen M. Rittereiser, Foundation and 
Endowment Investing: Philosophies and Strategies of Top 
Investors and Institutions  (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & 
Sons, 2015). The relevant chapter is at http://catalogimages.  
wiley.com/images/db/pdf/9780470122334.excerpt.pdf .FoRewoRd
CFA Institute Research Foundation  |  vii was considered authoritative, and the advice 
was taken seriously. Unfortunately, by the 
time the advice to invest in stocks was widely 
adopted, the market had reached its lofty 
1972 high, from which it declined by 49% in 
a short period. The foundation’s report was 
subsequently blamed for the losses. But it was 
unfairly blamed: a 50–50 or 60–40 portfolio of 
equities and bonds is a much better long-term 
investment than putting almost everything in 
bonds, as foundations had previously tended to 
do. Moreover, picking an asset mix and stick -
ing to it is usually better than trying to time the 
market.
The bull markets of the 1980s, 1990s, and 2000s 
proved the advice largely correct—although it 
will not always be correct. The market some -
times goes down and stays down, as it did from 
1929 to 1954, 1966 to 1991 (in real terms), and 
2000 to 2013. (This comment applies to price-
only indexes, such as the S&P 500 Index; if divi -
dends are counted, the recoveries were quicker.) 
Twenty-five or even thirteen years is a long time 
to not make any money other than dividend 
income, however, and if you had to spend sig -
nificantly out of the portfolio before the market 
recovered, you got hammered.
SPENDING BASED ON 
FUNDAMENTAL VALUES
So much for the risk of overspending when the 
market is high. We now assess the risk of over -
spending when the market is low, which we 
identified as the main risk of basing spending on 
fecundity.
The last time the US stock market was really, 
really low compared with fundamentals was not 
2008–2009 but the summer of 1982, when the 
P/E of the S&P 500 fell below 8. (The all-time 
high P/E, excluding periods of near-zero or negative earnings, was 34, in 1999.)4 In 1982, 
a spending rule based on earnings would have 
yielded spending equal to 1/12 of the portfolio 
(i.e., the E/P , the reciprocal of the P/E).
Such a high spending ratio would have been fine, 
considering that the market was rocketing off  
the 1982 bottom, but market participants had 
no guarantee that it would behave so. An earlier 
“generational” bottom occurred in 1974, when 
the P/E fell to 7.5. Despite rising thereafter, the 
P/E had fallen back to 8 by 1982, so spending 
would have been very heavy, relative to market 
values, over that whole miserable period.
Spending based on fundamental values has a 
counterpart to the risk mentioned earlier of not 
being able to cut spending easily in bad times. 
It is the risk of not being able to increase spend -
ing easily in good times!  The bull markets after 
the 1982 low were caused mostly by P/E expan -
sion, not by improvement in the fundamentals. 
Not until almost a decade later did earnings and 
other fundamentals begin to boom. Spending 
would have been frozen at roughly 1982 levels 
through the rising markets of the 1980s, surely 
a frustrating experience for those on whom the 
money was intended to be spent.
JAMES GARLAND’S 
CONTRIBUTION
Into this predicament steps James Garland, who 
managed assets for a family for decades and 
who is sensitive, perhaps more than most, to the 
problems posed by volatile spending and emo -
tional reactions to declining financial fortunes. 
Small institutions with less sophisticated boards 
and investment staffs often face dilemmas 
4These ratios are real, contemporaneous P/Es, not “CAPEs” 
(cyclically adjusted P/Es). The source is Robert Shiller’s 
website: www.econ.yale.edu/~shiller/data.htm .FoRewoRd
viii  |  CFA Institute Research Foundationsimilar to those encountered by families. They 
cannot raise new funds easily (or perhaps at all), 
and unlike Harvard and Yale, they are unable 
to evaluate risky but potentially high-returning 
strategies.
Garland’s advice is aimed at such organiza -
tions. He told me he was writing for the “Un-Q 
Group”—so, not the Q Group, a high-level 
discussion group for quantitative investment 
executives to which I belong, as did he at one 
time. He wrote to me, “Outside of my former 
day job at Jeffrey, my own experience has been 
as trustee or investment committee member 
for endowed institutions with $10 million to 
$300 million under management, and that’s the 
audience I’m aiming for here. ”5 Garland is writ -
ing, then, for the common woman or man with 
investment responsibilities.
THE POTENTIAL IRRELEVANCE 
OF MARKET VALUES
In this CFA Institute Research Foundation 
brief, “ A Cash-Flow Focus for Endowments and 
Trusts, ” Garland makes the unconventional case 
that market values are actually irrelevant  to per -
petual endowments:
In a world obsessed with market 
values, not following the crowd is 
difficult. For understandable rea -
sons, many endowment investors 
have been caught up in this obses -
sion. I will try to pull them back.
.  .  . for investors with perpetual 
time horizons, the market values 
of stocks and bonds do not have to 
matter at all. All that should matter 
is those assets’ ability to generate 
spendable cash. (p. 2)
5James Garland, email message to author (8 March 2018).This assertion is contrary to standard finance, 
which says that the current market value of an 
asset is the market’s assessment of the present 
value of all the cash the asset is ever expected 
to generate. By “the market, ” I mean all inves -
tors, including those who choose to not hold 
the asset, with the influence of each investor 
roughly proportional to the investor’s asset size.
So, market value, according to standard finance, 
is a summary statistic capturing everything  that 
is relevant about the asset: its expected future 
cash flows, the uncertainty surrounding that 
expectation (reflected in the discount rate), the 
surrender or liquidation value of the asset, and 
so forth. There is nothing irrelevant about it.
But Garland asserts that standard finance is 
the wrong tool for the investors he is seeking 
to persuade. His point of departure is, instead, 
behavioral. Both dividend and earnings policies 
are driven by human decision making. William 
Goetzmann, a professor at the Yale School 
of Management and a reviewer of Garland’s 
manuscript, served as a board member of The 
Jeffrey Company during Garland’s tenure as 
CEO, when Garland was refining and applying 
the principle of fecundity. Professor Goetzmann 
explains:
The dividend-based rule takes 
advantage of information that is 
potentially not impounded in the 
market price. The CEO of a com -
pany recommends a dividend that, 
under normal circumstances, he 
or she expects to be able to main -
tain and gradually exceed in nomi -
nal terms with a high probability. 
Hence, the CEO first solves a sto -
chastic control problem and the 
endowment investor can free-ride 
on the manager’s judgment.FoRewoRd
CFA Institute Research Foundation  |  ix Another advantage of the divi -
dend-based rule is that the firm 
puts its money where its mouth 
is—it pays out rather than retains, 
so in that sense it is a costly and 
thus valuable signal. Dividends 
smoothed at the firm level aggre -
gate up to a smooth dividend 
stream for the capitalization-
weighted index.
The earnings-based rule is similar. 
Earnings are, to some extent, man -
aged to minimize the chance of a 
negative surprise. They are closer 
to cheap talk than a dividend is, 
but the logic behind them is that 
they are better than raw cash flow 
as an economic measure of the 
activity of the firm over the report -
ing period.
Earnings are thus not intended to 
solve a stochastic control problem 
per se  and thus will be much more 
volatile at the firm level than divi -
dends. However, [Garland’s] paper 
shows that aggregation across a 
portfolio of stocks lowers the risk 
[of spending volatility], at least in 
the sample period shown in the 
analysis. It is hard to know if this 
would be true over a longer time 
period and in different economies.
Both the [dividend and earnings] 
rules have the virtue that spend -
ing is not exposed to market-value 
fluctuations. On the other hand, 
they rely on the norms of divi -
dend policy and earnings manage -
ment. These obviously can change 
through time and also may change 
with the industrial composition 
of the index. Their drawback is that they do not take advantage of 
the aggregate opinion of the mar -
ket about the capitalized value of 
future cash streams. Behavioral 
finance says that a non-market-
based policy that [deemphasizes] 
price fluctuations might be a good 
thing.6
CONCLUSION
The CFA Institute Research Foundation wel -
comes controversy and experimentation. Many 
of our authors and many of our readers will 
chafe at Garland’s unconventional recommen -
dations. Many others, sensing that there has 
always been something unrealistic and fac -
ile about the assumptions and conclusions of 
standard finance, will warmly welcome them. 
This essay is James Garland’s personal view, 
not that of the Research Foundation or CFA 
Institute, but it is a valuable contribution to the 
literature on endowments and spending. We are 
extremely proud to present his work.
Laurence B. Siegel
Gary P . Brinson Director of Research
CFA Institute Research Foundation
January 2019
6William Goetzmann, email message to author (5 December 
2015). Quoted with permission.CFA Institute Research Foundation  |  1 A CASH-FLOW FOCUS FOR 
ENDOWMENTS AND TRUSTS
James P . Garland, CFA
Former president  
The Jeffrey Company
I. INTRODUCTION
This article challenges a mindset that is com -
mon among trustees of perpetual endow -
ments and long-lived trusts. Those investors, 
like virtually all investors today, focus much of 
their attention on market values. However, for 
overseers of very-long-term investment funds, 
a focus instead on cash flows would be more 
productive.
This will not be an exhaustive examination of 
the subject. The story told here has been simpli -
fied and is based in part on my own experience 
in overseeing one very-long-lived trust fund. 
The primary goal of this article is to ask whether 
a better way of managing spending is available 
than basing spending on market values. The 
answer is yes.
The principal audience for this article is not 
American colleges and universities or other 
sophisticated endowed institutions (“sophis -
ticated” here meaning ones with their own 
dedicated investment personnel), because these 
institutions have access to investment tools and 
asset classes that are not available to the pub -
lic at large and they presumably understand 
how to use those specialized tools and assets. 
Instead, this article is addressed to the trustees of smaller endowed institutions and trusts, ones 
with $10 million, $50 million, or $100 million 
under management—entities typically overseen 
by volunteer “citizen soldier” trustees and enti -
ties for which traditional asset classes and tra -
ditional investment strategies are still the most 
appropriate options.
II. THE IRRELEVANCE 
OF MARKET VALUES
Market values do matter to most investors, 
those who are accumulating capital today with 
the expectation of consuming that capital in the 
future—for example, individuals who are sav -
ing for retirement. I will call these spend-down 
investors .
But market values should not matter to all inves -
tors. Some seek growing long-term streams of 
spendable cash from their capital and want to 
preserve that capital rather than consume it. 
This is true for overseers of endowment funds 
as well as for trustees of very-long-lived per -
sonal trust funds.
For brevity’s sake, I will refer to this small cadre 
of investors who are interested in long-term 
spendable cash flows as endowment investors .
I am grateful for helpful comments from Joel Dobris, Jeffrey Garland, David Levine, Donald Mykrantz, and especially 
Elroy Dimson, Will Goetzmann, and Larry Siegel. I also thank Mr. Levine for a spending rule described in Section III. 
Any errors remain my own.A CAsh-Flow FoCus F oR endowments And tRusts
2  |  CFA Institute Research FoundationIn a world obsessed with market values, not fol -
lowing the crowd is difficult. For understand -
able reasons, many endowment investors have 
been caught up in this obsession. I will try to 
pull them back.
The Significance of the Word 
Perpetual
I will primarily address perpetual endowment 
funds, and the important word here is perpetual .
An important phase change takes place when 
investors’ horizons become perpetual. For 
investors with limited time horizons, market 
values can matter very much. But for investors 
with perpetual time horizons, the market values 
of stocks and bonds do not have to matter at all. 
All that should matter is those assets’ ability to 
generate spendable cash.
For endowment investors, the most useful asset 
classes are those that can throw off growing 
streams of cash, such as equities. For US endow -
ment investors, the traditionally dominant asset 
class has been US equities, for which the S&P 
500 Index will serve here as a proxy.7
The stock market’s capacity to generate cash for 
its owners is driven by corporate profits and is 
made manifest through corporate dividends. 
A useful way to think of the S&P 500 is as a 
machine that dispenses cash on an annual basis. 
These dividend disgorgements have been rather 
stable from one year to the next, and over time, 
they have tended to increase slightly faster than 
inflation, with the rise driven by real economic 
growth. Figure 1  shows the S&P 500’s annual 
7The Standard & Poor’s Stock Index has comprised 500 
companies since March 1957. However, between 1926 and 
February 1957, that index consisted of only 90 companies. 
To keep things simple, I will use the term S&P 500  here, 
even when referring to pre-1957 data.market values, earnings, and dividends since 
1950, all in real dollars.
The most stable series has been dividends, and 
that stability is no fluke. Market values drift 
slowly upward and downward, like tides in the 
ocean. Earnings are buffeted by economic and 
political events, which are like waves. Dividends, 
on the other hand, are deliberately smoothed by 
the executives who set them. Dividend cuts are 
an embarrassment, whereas dividend increases 
are a source of pride. And because corporate 
executives are insiders, who presumably are 
knowledgeable about their businesses, divi -
dends provide useful signals about the future.
At an elementary level, market values and divi -
dends are linked; an endowment whose market 
value is $ X will generate only half as many divi -
dends as one whose value is $2 X. But beyond 
this point, the link falls apart. For example, at 
year-end 1980, the cost to purchase $1 of S&P 
500 annual dividends was only $22, but by the 
end of 1999, that cost had risen to $88.8
The many endowment investors who currently 
base spending on market values are missing an 
important point. They are assuming that ris -
ing market values will justify increased spend -
ing and that falling market values will call for a 
spending cut, but that is not the case. Rising or 
falling market values by themselves simply indi -
cate that investors are paying higher or lower 
prices for what is often just the same cash flows. 
Market values do tend to revert toward their 
means, but reversion can be so slow and the 
drift away from those means so large that mar -
ket values are not a useful guide to spending.
8The former is a 1980 year-end S&P 500 market value of 
$135.76 divided by a calendar-year 1980 dividend payout 
of $6.16, and the latter is a 1999 year-end market value of 
$1,469.25 divided by a calendar-year payout of $16.69. The 
trailing dividend yields on these two dates were 4.54% and 
1.14%, respectively.A CAsh-Flow FoCus F oR endowments And tRusts
CFA Institute Research Foundation  |  3 Perpetual endowment investors should view all 
potential assets primarily from a cash-flow per -
spective. What are those assets’ current actual 
or potential cash flows? What are their future 
actual or potential cash flows? How reliable 
and predictable are those cash flows? And of 
course, what would purchasing those cash flows 
cost today? For this last point, market values 
do matter—but only for an instant. Once pur -
chased, those assets’ market values fade in sig -
nificance, except on the infrequent occasions 
when investors could boost their current or 
future cash flows or improve the security or reli -
ability of those cash flows by trading one asset 
for another.
In a similar vein, endowment investors who 
seek intergenerational equity—those who want 
to treat current and future beneficiaries the 
same—should pay less attention to market val -
ues and more attention to what really matters: 
the cash-generating capacity of their assets.I suspect that a century ago, most endowment 
trustees based distributions on the actual cash 
flows from their investments—that is, on inter -
est and dividend receipts. Although I am sug -
gesting here that trustees should focus on cash 
flows, I do not mean that endowment payouts 
should be precisely tied to those cash flows. I am 
not proposing a return to the past. In some cases 
(e.g., with most equities in a growing economy), 
trustees may be able to distribute more than the 
actual cash flows their assets generate. In other 
cases (e.g., with fixed-rate bonds in an inflation -
ary environment), they may need to distribute 
less. The link between potential cash distribu -
tions from stock and bond portfolios and the 
actual cash receipts from the stocks and bonds 
in those portfolios is simply tighter—and, there -
fore, more useful—than the link between poten -
tial cash distributions and market values.
Here I wish to differentiate between the amounts 
that endowment trustees can distribute to their FIGURE 1.   S&P 500 MARKET VALUES/EARNINGS/DIVIDENDS
Real 1950 Dollars (log scale)
1,000
100
10
1
50 70 60 80 90 2000 10
Market V alues Earnings Dividends
Sources:  standard & Poor’s; Bureau of labor statistics.A CAsh-Flow FoCus F oR endowments And tRusts
4  |  CFA Institute Research Foundationinstitutions, on the one hand, and the actual divi -
dends and interest those institutions receive, on 
the other. Current investment lingo is no help. 
For example, income  has too many meanings, and 
distributable cash when in endowment mode  is 
awkward. Therefore, I have borrowed from agri -
culture the word fecundity . I define fecundity to 
mean, in an endowment context, the amount of 
cash that an endowment can distribute each year 
without threatening its capacity to make simi -
lar distributions, in inflation-adjusted dollars, 
in the future.9 Stated differently, the fecundity of 
an endowment is the amount of spendable cash 
it can generate each year when the fund’s trustees 
are attempting to act in an intergenerationally 
equitable matter . I propose that the fecundity of 
perpetual endowment funds is closely, but not 
perfectly, linked to the actual and/or potential 
cash flows from those funds’ investments.
Later sections of this article elaborate on the 
points made here. Section III discusses spend -
ing rules and makes the case that focusing on 
fecundity is more useful than focusing on mar -
ket values. Section V discusses intergenerational 
equity and presents a similar conclusion.
III. SPENDING RULES
To simplify the discussion that follows, I will 
deal only with closed perpetual endowment 
funds—“closed” meaning that no new gifts are 
expected—and very-long-lived personal trust 
funds.
The primary objective of these funds is to dis -
tribute cash flows to their owners that keep pace 
with inflation over the very long term. A common 
9That is, the amount that can be distributed to all parties , 
which includes investment managers, custodians, and (in 
the case of taxable trusts) the IRS for capital gains taxes. 
The endowed institution itself gets to spend only what 
is left.secondary objective is to have those distributions 
be reasonably stable from one year to the next.
Earlier, I introduced the term fecundity  to 
refer to the amount of cash endowment funds 
can distribute in the current year. The endow -
ment community has already adopted the term 
intergenerational equity  to refer to a desire to 
maintain those distributions in perpetuity. An 
intergenerationally equitable endowment fund 
is one that maintains its fecundity forever.
To provide growing cash distributions, endow -
ments often emphasize assets that naturally pro -
vide growing cash payouts. The two most widely 
used asset classes are publicly traded equities 
and real estate. These days, large and sophisti -
cated funds invest in alternative asset classes, 
many of which are just equities in fancy dress. 
Many funds that base their spending on market 
values also invest in return-dampening assets, 
such as bonds. But I will focus here on the dom -
inant asset class in most American endowment 
funds—namely, publicly traded equities.
Why Use Spending Rules?
The dual objectives of most endowment funds 
are, first, to generate a stream of spendable cash 
that at least keeps pace with inflation and, sec -
ond, to have that stream be stable from one year 
to the next. Achieving these objectives is quite 
difficult because, among other things, future 
returns are unknowable. Furthermore, balanc -
ing today’s visible cash needs against tomor -
row’s invisible cash needs is a challenging task. 
To guide their institutions through this inter -
temporal financial haze—to serve as a compass 
in the fog—trustees use algorithms to determine 
current spending amounts. These algorithms 
are called spending rules.
Many different spending rules exist, but here I 
will focus on just five.A CAsh-Flow FoCus F oR endowments And tRusts
CFA Institute Research Foundation  |  5 In the centuries before formal spending rules 
came into being, a common practice was to 
spend all income. This first spending rule is still 
in use.10 I will call this the Default Spending Rule .
A second rule, which seems to have become 
popular in the late 1960s, says to base spending 
on market values rather than on income. I will 
call this the Market-Value Spending Rule .
One flaw of the Market-Value Spending Rule is 
that market values are quite volatile, which makes 
distributions volatile as well. In reaction, some 
trustees adopted a rule that locked in the rate at 
which distributions would grow. I will call this 
third rule the Anchor & Pointer Spending Rule .
Finally, this article describes a pair of newer 
rules that combine some of the earlier rules’ 
better features. These fourth and fifth rules are 
related, because they are both based on the 
cash-flow-generating capacity of the funds’ 
underlying assets. I will refer to these collec -
tively as Cash-Flow Spending Rules ; one is the 
Cash-Flow Dividends Rule , and the other is the 
Cash-Flow Earnings Rule .
The Default Spending Rule
The Default Spending Rule is so simple that it 
can be described completely in just eight words: 
Spend the cash that comes in the door . (Here I 
mean recurring cash distributions, such as from 
property and securities—not cash from asset 
sales.) An assumption in this case is that the 
endowments’ assets will generate rather steady 
cash flows via interest, dividends, rents, or other 
such sources.
10The most recent study of endowments by the National 
Association of College and University Business Officers 
and Commonfund Institute (2017) revealed that 3% of 
reporting American institutions still spent whatever 
income came in the door. I suspect that the percentage is 
higher among smaller and less sophisticated institutions.In Unconventional Success: A Fundamental 
Approach to Personal Investment  (2005), Yale 
University chief investment officer David 
Swensen recommended six “core asset classes” 
for American investors: US equities, non-US 
developed-market equities, emerging-market 
equities, US Treasury bonds, US inflation-
indexed bonds (Treasury Inflation-Protected 
Securities, or TIPS), and securitized real estate 
(REITs).11 All six provide natural cash flows, 
and five of the six tend to provide growing cash 
flows. Swensen’s book was addressed to indi -
vidual investors, presumably spend-down inves -
tors who were saving for retirement. If these six 
asset classes should be core assets for spend-
down investors, then they should be even more 
attractive for endowment investors whose pri -
mary concern is cash flows.
Advantages
A fundamental precept in finance is that 
risk—meaning here the possibility of adverse 
outcomes—can be reduced by matching the 
characteristics of an institution’s assets with 
those of its liabilities.
The liabilities of endowment funds are the 
spendable cash flows that their institutions need 
today, tomorrow, and forever. Given this con -
stant need for cash, the lower-risk strategy for 
endowments is to invest in Swensen’s core asset 
classes. Perhaps by custom and/or intuition 
rather than by design, endowment funds have 
traditionally adopted this lower-risk approach. 
Cash flows will not be perfectly stable, and the 
cash flows may not grow at the same pace as the 
institutions’ needs grow, but at least investing in 
cash-generating assets reduces risk.
A further advantage of the Default Spending 
Rule—and of the asset allocation that underlies 
11See Swensen (2005), Chapter 2.A CAsh-Flow FoCus F oR endowments And tRusts
6  |  CFA Institute Research Foundationthis rule—is that it has an extremely long track 
record. Among the oldest endowed institutions 
in the English-speaking world are the various 
colleges of Oxford and Cambridge Universities, 
some of which date back more than 800 years. 
As of 2002, the better-endowed colleges at 
Oxford and Cambridge had invested roughly 
40% of their capital in property and roughly 40% 
in equities. These very old institutions still pre -
ferred assets that generated cash.12
The Market-Value Spending Rule
In the late 1960s, as a decades-long bull mar -
ket was coming to an end, the Ford Foundation 
published a report titled “Managing Educational 
Endowments, ”13 which noted several problems 
with the Default Spending Rule. One was the 
temptation to focus on high-yield equities and to 
overinvest in bonds, both of which boosted cur -
rent income but reduced potential future returns 
and future income growth. The report suggested 
basing spending on market values rather than on 
income to get around these and other problems. 
Specifically, it recommended that endowments 
spend 5% of their portfolios’ market values aver -
aged over the trailing three years. Although 
some institutions were already basing spending 
on market values, the Ford Foundation popular -
ized this idea and, in effect, gave birth to what 
we now call the Market-Value Spending Rule .
Description
The Market-Value Spending Rule in its most 
common form says to spend X percent of the 
12Acharya and Dimson (2007, p. 132). “Better-endowed 
colleges” were ones with endowments worth more than 
£45 million. However, the authors noted some move -
ment among Oxbridge colleges toward the alternative 
asset classes favored by American Ivy League universities; 
see p. 7.
13See Advisory Committee on Endowment Management 
(1969).market value of the portfolio averaged over 
the past P periods. X was originally 5% but can 
vary from institution to institution and from 
one period to the next. These days, in an era of 
high stock and bond prices, some institutions 
may spend 4.5% or even 4%, because high cur -
rent prices suggest lower future returns.14,15 
Standard practice has been to average market 
values over quarterly intervals, with 12 quarters 
perhaps being most common.
Advantages
A spending rule based on market values is 
indifferent to investment cash flows. This frees 
endowments to invest in anything—from near-
traditional assets, such as venture capital and 
private equity, to exotic assets, such as postage 
stamps and violins.16 Any asset that might offer 
a reasonable return is fair game.
Furthermore, the Market-Value Spending Rule 
allows endowments to make tactical asset 
shifts without affecting the institutions’ spend -
ing. Under the Default Spending Rule, a shift 
from bonds to equities (or vice versa) would 
immediately affect an institution’s distributable 
cash. Under the Market-Value Spending Rule, 
14Today, some institutions use higher spending rates than 
these, either because they are desperate for cash or because 
they have good reasons that justify the higher rates. Yale 
University, for example, used a 5.25% rate during its 2016 
fiscal year. But Yale’s high rate is justifiable because of both 
the university’s proven investment skills and its fundraising 
prowess. For further justifications for high current spend -
ing rates, see Goetzmann and Oster (2015). For a discus -
sion of the stickiness of the once-ubiquitous 5% spending 
rate, see Dobris (2005).
15In what may be a harbinger of an even further shift, the 
overseers of Norway’s huge sovereign wealth fund have 
proposed dropping that fund’s spending rate all the way 
to 3%. See Richard Milne, “Norway Plans Shake-Up of 
$900bn Oil Fund, ” Financial Times  (16 February 2017): 1.
16These last two are mentioned here because they did 
generate positive real returns during the 20th century. See 
Dimson and Spaenjers (2014).A CAsh-Flow FoCus F oR endowments And tRusts
CFA Institute Research Foundation  |  7 however, asset shifts can be made on the basis of 
criteria other than their effect on current yields.
Basing spending on market values also frees 
endowed institutions from being dependent on 
the actions of strangers—that is, from having 
their spending determined (at least in part) by the 
corporate directors who set dividend payouts.
Finally, basing spending on market values is sim -
ple, as long as an institution holds easily valued 
assets. All one needs is market values plus the 
institution’s particular percentage spending rate.
The Anchor & Pointer 
Spending Rule
Unfortunately, market values fluctuate so much 
that even three-year or 12-quarter smoothing fails 
to generate stable spending streams. As a result, 
some years ago, someone—the origin is uncer -
tain—devised a rule that would prevent spending 
from being whipsawed by the markets.17 I call 
this the Anchor & Pointer Spending Rule .
Description
To apply this rule, trustees first set a current 
spending rate, usually in dollar, rather than per -
centage, terms. That rate is the anchor . Then the 
trustees set the percentage rate at which future 
spending will increase. That is the pointer . For 
example, one institution’s trustees might set 
this year’s spending at $200,000 and declare 
that future spending will increase by 2.5% per 
year. An unwritten assumption is that the trust -
ees will revisit both the anchor and the pointer 
from time to time.
17In recent years, Commonfund Institute has been pro -
moting one particular version of this rule, but it is unclear 
whether it qualifies as the parent in the same sense that 
the Ford Foundation seems to qualify as the parent of the 
Market-Value Spending Rule.Advantages
The obvious problem with basing spending on 
market values is that market values fluctuate too 
much to be smoothed by simple averaging. The 
Anchor & Pointer Spending Rule solves this prob -
lem. Under this rule, spending can be perfectly 
stable from one year to the next, or at least it can 
be stable until trustees choose to reset the anchor.
Some adopters of this rule add a further con -
straint that annual spending, measured as a 
percentage of market value, should not exceed 
certain upper and lower limits. The financial 
reason for such a constraint is not apparent, 
although the public-affairs reason is.
Suppose an institution adopts the Anchor & 
Pointer Spending Rule and sets its spending 
rate at a dollar rate that is equivalent to 4% of 
its endowment’s current value. Suppose further 
that the market value of that endowment soon 
falls by a third, which would cause the spending 
rate to become 6%. Or suppose instead that the 
value soon rises by 50%, which would lead to a 
2.7% spending rate. Intuitively, 6% might sound 
too high to the trustees and lead to the percep -
tion that the institution is cannibalizing its capi -
tal. Likewise, 2.7% might sound too low and lead 
to the perception that the institution is hoarding 
its capital. To avoid these problems, the trustees 
in this situation might stipulate that, although 
the current anchor spending rate might be, say, 
4%, future spending rates should not fall below, 
say, 3% or rise above, say, 5%.18
This cap-and-floor constraint does not change 
the pointer’s fundamental role. All versions of the 
Anchor & Pointer Spending Rule—that is, versions 
using a simple pointer or versions using a pointer 
18Commonfund Institute refers to this as the Banded 
Rule  or—when the Consumer Price Index is used as the 
pointer—the Banded Inflation Rule . See Sedlacek and 
Jarvis (2010).A CAsh-Flow FoCus F oR endowments And tRusts
8  |  CFA Institute Research Foundationplus a cap and floor—have the beneficial effect of 
smoothing spending, at least in the short term.
The Shortcomings of These 
Three Rules
No spending rule produces perfect results. No 
rule will generate a smooth flow of spendable 
cash that rises in lockstep with an institution’s 
spending needs.
Shortcomings of the Default 
Spending Rule
The Default Spending Rule’s primary flaw is that 
cash flows from such assets as real estate and 
equities are unstable and somewhat unpredict -
able. Furthermore, they do not always keep pace 
with inflation.
The naive approach of spending all the cash that 
comes in the door may be particularly ill-suited 
to real estate investments. Cash flows from 
rents are normally greater than the amounts one 
may spend because of a need to set aside funds 
for maintenance, among other things. And real 
estate investments are often financed with debt. 
The amount and cost of any debt must be fac -
tored into spending decisions.19
Corporate dividend cash flows are also unstable 
and may not keep pace with inflation. Although 
in some countries—the United States being a 
prime example—dividend disbursements have 
historically grown in real-dollar terms, that has 
not been the case worldwide. A study of global 
dividend payouts since 1900 found that dividends 
grew faster than inflation in 9 of 19 national mar -
kets but grew more slowly in the other 10.20
19Elroy Dimson, private communication, 2014.
20This fact comes from the Credit Suisse Research Institute 
(2011). The data were compiled by Elroy Dimson, Paul 
Marsh, and Mike Staunton.A more serious problem is that endowed institu -
tions using the Default Spending Rule are slaves 
to their income sources. They can spend only 
what they receive. Given trustees’ natural incli -
nation to worry more about their institutions’ 
current needs than their future needs, trustees 
can easily fall into the trap of preferring assets 
that produce high current income at the cost of 
lower future returns and lower future spending.
In a similar vein, the Default Spending Rule 
allows little room for alternative asset classes—
that is, for those that do not generate cash 
flows. Venture capital funds, undeveloped land, 
commodities, and hedge funds are not feasible 
investment choices.
Finally, at least in the United States, basing 
spending on investment cash flows is consid -
ered old-fashioned, a relic of the distant past. 
No trustee likes being considered a dinosaur by 
his or her peers.
Shortcomings of the Market-
Value Spending Rule
The Market-Value Spending Rule has shortcom -
ings as well. First, as Figure 1 showed, stock 
market values are far from stable. Market values 
have moved upward and downward in huge, 
slow swings. Real market values declined by 
more than 50% from 1968 to 1982 and again 
from 1999 to 2008. Twelve-quarter averaging 
smoothes market values slightly but does noth -
ing whatsoever to dampen the market’s long-
term swings. Basing spending on market values 
would appear to produce less stable results than 
basing spending on earnings or dividends. Later, 
I will show that this indeed has been the case.
Endowment trustees try to compensate for 
the instability of market values by diversify -
ing into nontraditional (non-core) assets. But 
because the returns from most financial assets A CAsh-Flow FoCus F oR endowments And tRusts
CFA Institute Research Foundation  |  9 are positively correlated, broad diversification, 
although perhaps dampening market-value 
swings, is not likely to extinguish them.
In addition, the desire to smooth market values 
will lure investors into alternative asset classes, 
and alternative assets are sometimes higher risk 
and often much higher cost. Non-core assets 
can be useful in endowment portfolios— if their 
inclusion is done with forethought and only to 
a limited extent. But basing spending on mar -
ket values encourages endowment investors to 
overdiversify and to invest in lower-return, vol -
atility-dampening assets.
Finally, market values are only loosely—if at 
all—related to the cash-generating capacity of 
the underlying assets. Investors as a whole seem 
to believe that the cash-generating capacity of 
assets is a function of their market value. That 
belief is wrong.
Figure 2  shows the results of using the most 
common version of the Market-Value Spending 
Rule—that is, spending 5% of market values 
averaged over the previous 12 calendar quar -
ters. Given that the near-universal practice is 
to hold some bonds to stabilize market values, 
the line shows the results since 1950 when using 
what may be today’s most common simple asset 
mix—70% equities and 30% bonds, rebalanced 
quarterly.21
The story told here is that, even with a tradi -
tional balanced portfolio, the Market-Value 
21Here equities are represented by the S&P 500. Bonds 
are represented by the Ibbotson Associates Long-Term 
Government Bond Index through 1975 and by the 
Bloomberg Barclays US Aggregate Bond Index thereafter. 
The equity and bond weightings are rebalanced at the end 
of each calendar quarter. Annual spending equals 5% of the 
market value of the portfolio averaged over the 12 calendar 
quarters ending each 31 December. For example, spending 
for 1996 equals 5% of the average quarterly market values 
from March 1993 through December 1995.Spending Rule does not work well. Spending 
in real dollars more than doubled from 1950 
to 1965, then more than halved from 1965 to 
1981, and then more than tripled from 1981 
to 2000.
Does your institution want stable spending 
from one decade to the next? Market values 
will not provide it. Would greater diversifica -
tion help? Probably—but only to a modest 
degree, because of the pernicious tendency of 
asset classes to move in the same direction. 
And furthermore, diversification for the sake 
of dampening market-value swings may dimin -
ish overall returns.
The Market-Value Spending Rule has major 
shortcomings. Nevertheless, because of its com -
putational simplicity, the rule may be useful for 
smaller institutions where endowment spending 
represents only a small fraction of the institu -
tions’ budgets. But other institutions should 
look elsewhere.
Shortcomings of the Anchor & 
Pointer Spending Rule
The primary challenge in using the Anchor & 
Pointer Spending Rule is to correctly set the all-
important original spending rate—the anchor. 
Without a proper anchor (i.e., without one set at 
an intergenerationally equitable rate that is nei -
ther too high nor too low), the rule will fail. Yet 
the Anchor & Pointer Spending Rule is not as 
flawed as the previous sentence suggests. I will 
return to this rule later in this article.
In a similar vein, the pointer can also be prob -
lematic, because a pointer that rises too quickly 
can do nearly as much long-term damage as an 
anchor that is set too high. Setting the pointer 
to follow, say, the Consumer Price Index (CPI) 
is all for the good if the cash-generating capacity A CAsh-Flow FoCus F oR endowments And tRusts
10  |  CFA Institute Research Foundationof the institution’s endowment grows at that 
same rate. But what if it does not?
So, an Anchor & Pointer Spending Rule 
approach can be reasonable if the anchor and 
pointer are set correctly. But what anchor, and 
what pointer? Because the rule itself does not 
provide the necessary answers, the rule as it 
has thus far been stated is incomplete. It needs 
some means for setting a reasonable anchor and 
for determining, after the rule has been in place 
for several years, whether spending has gone off  
track.
Cash-Flow Spending Rules
Each of these three spending rules is far from 
perfect. Is designing a better rule that is at least 
less imperfect possible? A better rule might 
combine the strengths of these three rules while 
avoiding or at least ameliorating their weak -
nesses. I will propose such a rule later in this 
section.The best way to explain where this proposal is 
heading is to describe the route.
Professional investors, academics, private inves -
tors, those investors’ advisers, and corporate 
executives have all largely succumbed to what 
one observer has called “the fetishization of 
market values. ”22 Market values of course matter 
to spend-down investors, who are buying stocks 
and bonds today and will sell those stocks and 
bonds several decades from now. Market val -
ues also matter to corporate executives whose 
bonuses are tied to the price of their companies’ 
stock, and they matter especially to executives 
who are compensated with stock options, which 
are leveraged bets on stock prices. And mar -
ket values matter to money managers, because 
those values are the basis for their fees.
22I heard this wonderful phrase on National Public Radio 
in March 2014 but unfortunately cannot recall the speak -
er’s name.FIGURE 2.   SPENDING 5% OF AVERAGE MARKET VALUE  
(70/30 mIX, st ARtInG mARKet  VAlue = $100)
Real 1950 Dollars
15
10
5
0
50 70 60 80 90 2000 10A CAsh-Flow FoCus F oR endowments And tRusts
CFA Institute Research Foundation  |  11 However, unlike their fellow investors, endow -
ment investors do not have to worry about 
market values. All endowment investors really 
should worry about is the cash-generating 
capacity—the fecundity—of their assets.
The new spending rules I offer here focus on 
cash flows rather than market values. I offer two 
related rules, each based on the same underly -
ing principle—namely, base spending on the 
actual or potential cash-generating capacity of 
the endowment fund’s assets, when those assets 
are being managed in an intergenerationally 
equitable manner  (i.e., in a manner that favors 
neither the present at the expense of the future 
nor the future at the expense of the present). 
I will refer to these collectively as Cash-Flow 
Spending Rules . One version I will call the Cash-
Flow Dividends Rule , and the other, the Cash-
Flow Earnings Rule .
The challenge in applying these Cash-Flow 
Spending Rules to an endowment is determining 
the cash-generating capacity—the fecundity—
of each major asset class in the portfolio.
I will illustrate how to apply these rules by cal -
culating the fecundity of equities and, in partic -
ular, US equities. This is a useful starting point 
because US equities are the predominant asset 
in most American endowment funds, particu -
larly in smaller and medium-sized funds.
The future cash-flow-generating capacity of 
equities is equal to their future real returns. 
What is the fundamental source of equity 
returns? (Hint: It is not market values.)
Warren Buffett knows the answer: “Investors 
as a whole cannot get anything out of their 
businesses except what the businesses earn. ”23 
23Warren Buffett and Carol Loomis, “Mr. Buffett on the 
Stock Market, ” Fortune  (22 November 1999, p. 216).In  other words, the fundamental source of 
returns from equities is corporate profits.
Actually, Mr. Buffett was an optimist. In the 
past, the returns earned from owning shares 
of American publicly traded corporations have 
been less than those corporations’ profits.24 
To illustrate this point, assume an investor 
purchased shares of the S&P 500 at the end of 
1949 and subsequently spent all the reported 
profits from those shares.25 If that investor had 
withdrawn from the portfolio “what the busi -
nesses earned” (i.e., all of the reported profits), 
then in theory, his or her spending should have 
remained somewhat constant over time, in real 
dollars. But in reality, spending declined signifi -
cantly; spending 100% of profits was spending 
too much. This result is shown by the solid line 
in Figure 3 . Here we set the 1950 dividend pay -
out at $100.
If this investor could not spend 100% of prof -
its, how much could he or she spend? Figure 3 
also shows the results of spending 100% of 
dividends (the dotted line), and here the results 
are just the opposite: Spending dividends 
meant spending too little. To paraphrase Mr. 
Buffett, investors were able to get out of their 
businesses something less than what the busi -
nesses earned but something more than just 
the dividends.
Figure 1 plots annual earnings and dividends for 
the S&P 500 since 1950. The most stable line in 
the graph is the dividends line. If the amount 
24See Arnott and Bernstein (2002, p. 71), who studied the 
period from 1802 to 2001 and found that “in the absence 
of changes in valuation levels, the earnings yield systemati -
cally overstates future real stock returns. ”
25In Figure 3, for the spend-all-earnings line, the investor 
spent all dividends and cashed in a portion of the shares 
that represented the retained earnings. Thus, the number 
of shares owned by this investor declined slowly over time. 
However, for the spend-all-dividends line, the investor 
kept all the shares he or she owned at the start.A CAsh-Flow FoCus F oR endowments And tRusts
12  |  CFA Institute Research Foundationthat investors will earn from equities lies some -
where between earnings and dividends, then 
because the dividend series is the more stable of 
the two, I will begin there.
A cash-flow formula based 
on dividends
As a first attempt at determining the spendable 
cash flows from US equities, I propose the fol -
lowing: Spend dividends plus something.
What should “something” be? The total amount 
that one can spend from an endowment port -
folio invested in equities should, in theory, 
equal the future long-term real return of those 
equities. A widely used formula to estimate the 
long-term real return is “Current dividend yield + Expected annual real dividend growth rate. ”26 
That simple formula, based on the classic divi -
dend discount model of Williams (1938) and of 
Gordon and Shapiro (1956), was offered in the 
early 1970s as a spending rule by Nichols (1971, 
1974) and Tobin (1974), although their idea 
seemed to have gained virtually no traction at 
the time. I shall resurrect their work here.
A spending formula of “current yield plus per -
centage growth” makes sense in theory but in 
practice is suboptimal because it still ties spend -
ing to market values and thereby to the market’s 
26See, for example, Fama and French (2002); Grinold, 
Kroner, and Siegel (2011); and Ilmanen (2012). These days, 
those who estimate future returns often include other fac -
tors, but their models usually begin with dividend yield 
plus dividend growth. These two factors will also be useful 
when setting an anchor for the Anchor & Pointer Spending 
Rule, as I will explain later.FIGURE 3.   SPEND EARNINGS VS. SPEND DIVIDENDS  
(100% e QuIt Y PoRtF olIo)
Annual Spending (Real Dollars, 1950 Dividends = $100)
400
200300
100
0
50 70 60 80 90 2000 10
Spend 100% of Earnings Spend 100% of Dividends
Sources:  standard & Poor’s; Bureau of labor statistics.A CAsh-Flow FoCus F oR endowments And tRusts
CFA Institute Research Foundation  |  13 wild swings.27 The Nichols and Tobin spending 
rule of “yield plus dividend growth” is not quite 
what we seek.
A better way to define spending based on divi -
dends—and to make spending independent of 
market values—would be to declare that spend -
ing should be dividends times some number 
greater than 1. Garland (1989) adopted that 
approach with the following rule: Spendable 
income each year, for the equity portion of an 
endowment portfolio, should equal 130% of the 
dividends generated by an equivalent invest -
ment in the S&P 500.28
The average yield of US stocks during the 20th 
century was slightly over 4.5%.29 An extra 30% 
more than dividends would have meant an extra 
1.35%, which is close to the actual real dividend 
growth experienced since 1950 by the S&P 
500.30 Thus, this 130%-of-dividends spending 
rule echoes the original proposal of Nichols and 
Tobin, except that this newer rule is indepen -
dent of market values.
The formula says to spend 130% of the dividends 
for the S&P 500, rather than the dividends from 
an endowment’s actual equities, to free trustees 
to invest in something other than the S&P 500 if 
they wish. The only reason for not investing in 
the S&P 500 (or in some other broad stock mar -
ket index) would be to attempt to earn higher-
than-market returns, and unlike the Default 
27“Percentage growth” is the problem because in calculat -
ing fecundity, trustees would multiply that percentage by 
their endowments’ market value.
28See Garland (1989, 2005). Actually, the 1989 paper pro -
posed setting spending at 125% of dividends, but in the 
2005 paper, I changed that to 130%.
29Elroy Dimson, Paul Marsh, and Mike Staunton, private 
communication, 2015.
30From 1950 through 2017, using a log-linear best-fit 
approach calculated with Microsoft Excel’s LOGEST func -
tion, the S&P 500’s trendline real dividend growth was 
1.33% per year.Spending Rule, the Cash-Flow Dividends Rule 
will not penalize institutions that attempt to 
do so.
A cash-flow formula based 
on earnings
Because dividends have been somewhat stable 
over time, a “spend dividends plus something” 
formula should have worked rather well, and I 
will show in a moment that it has. But is there 
an even better approach? Using dividends as 
the basis for spending is not problem free. First, 
the dividend payout ratio of the S&P 500 has 
been trending downward. During the 1950s and 
1960s, the payout averaged about 55% of earn -
ings, but during the 1990s and 2000s, the pay -
out averaged about 42% of earnings.31 Second, 
corporations have been aggressively buying 
back their shares recently, which has siphoned 
away cash that otherwise could have been used 
to pay dividends. For these reasons, a more 
useful approach might be to base estimates of 
future real returns on earnings rather than on 
dividends.32
In the next attempt to apply the Cash-Flow 
Spending Rules to equities, I will take a different 
tack and propose the following: Spend earnings 
less something.
As with the dividend-based formula, I will 
examine a portfolio that is 100% invested in 
the S&P 500. Because earnings for this index 
have been quite volatile, particularly in recent 
years (as shown in Figure 1), the new formula 
will smooth those earnings. And because more 
years should produce a smoother series, the for -
mula will average them over 15 years. In other 
31These numbers are calculated as (Total dividends for the 
decade) ÷ (Total earnings for the decade).
32See, for example, Fama and French (2002) and Ilmanen 
(2012).A CAsh-Flow FoCus F oR endowments And tRusts
14  |  CFA Institute Research Foundationwords, spending in year Y will be based on 
average earnings for the years (Y – 15) through 
(Y – 1).33
If 130% of dividends is a reasonably good speci -
fication for “dividends plus something, ” then 
“earnings less something” should be based on 
numbers that fall in roughly the same ballpark. 
If we simplify history and declare that the pay -
out ratio for the S&P 500 since 1950 has aver -
aged around 50%, then 130% of that would be 
65%. Therefore, I shall use 65% of earnings in 
this formula.
Using the average of 15 years of past earnings 
as a basis for current spending, with no further 
adjustments, would mean using an average that 
is stale by seven and a half years. This stale aver -
age can be brought up to date by normalizing 
the earnings in two ways. First, I will adjust past 
earnings for inflation by restating them in cur -
rent dollars. Second, I will grow the past average 
earnings for seven and a half years at what has 
been very roughly the S&P 500’s long-term real 
earnings growth rate of 1.5% per year.
To adjust the earnings for inflation, I will first 
calculate the compound annual inflation rate 
over the past 15 years and call the result i. Then, 
I will inflate the 15-year average reported earn -
ings by the inflation experienced over half of 
this period—that is, over seven and a half years. 
The inflation adjustment (INFL) will, therefore, 
be the following:
INFL = (1 + i)7.5.
33The spending formula that follows is the brainchild of 
David A. Levine. Mr. Levine is (among other things) the 
former chief economist at Sanford C. Bernstein & Co., 
and he first proposed a version of this formula to me many 
years ago. He has graciously provided me with this for -
mula and with some of the data for Figures 4 and 5. See 
Levine (2011).To adjust stale earnings for subsequent growth, 
using similar logic, I will again simplify the cal -
culations by assuming 1.5% real annual growth 
over the 7.5-year period. The growth adjust -
ment (GRTH) will be
GRTH = (1.015)7.5.
Normalized current earnings per share (NCEPS) 
will, therefore, be the following:
NCEPS =  (Average of 15 years’ past  
nominal EPS) × INFL × GRTH.
I will make one additional small adjustment by 
dividing NCEPS by 105% to compensate for a 
computational issue.34
Now we have all the elements required to cal -
culate the current year’s spending rate with an 
earnings-based formula. I will begin (as with the 
dividend-based formula) by determining how 
many shares of the S&P 500 are held in the port -
folio.35 On a per-share basis, spending in year 
Z will equal 65% of the average earnings of one 
S&P 500 share over the previous 15 years (Z – 
15 through Z – 1), normalized to the present by 
growing the average by 1.5% per year for seven 
and a half years, adjusting for inflation, and 
finally dividing by the 105% “corrector. ” Total 
dollar spending in year Z will, therefore, equal
34The normalization process used here has the unfortu -
nate consequence of overstating current earnings slightly 
because of compounding. The higher the past earnings 
growth rate, the greater the overstatement. Given the infla -
tion that prevailed between 1945 and 2016 and given our 
presumption of 1.5% real EPS trend growth, the overstate -
ment works out to roughly 5%, which is the reason for the 
105% divisor.
The author of this earnings-based rule, David A. Levine, 
suspects that a 103% divisor might work better in the 
future, given today’s lower inflation. Private communica -
tion, April 2017.
35As before, this formula will use S&P 500 numbers rather 
than numbers for an endowment’s actual equities.A CAsh-Flow FoCus F oR endowments And tRusts
CFA Institute Research Foundation  |  15 (Number of S&P 500 shares) × (NCEPS)  
 × (65%) ÷ (1.05).
The results for the Cash-Flow Dividends Rule 
and the Cash-Flow Earnings Rule appear 
together in Figure 4 . Because the Cash-Flow 
Earnings Rule uses 15-year average earnings 
whereas the Cash-Flow Dividends Rule uses 
single-year dividends, the Cash-Flow Earnings 
Rule spending begins later, in 1960, and the 
Cash-Flow Dividends Rule spending begins in 
1950. For comparison, the graph shows once 
again the results for the Market-Value Spending 
Rule.36 Both variants of the Cash-Flow Spending 
Rules—that is, the rule based on earnings and 
the rule based on dividends—use a 100% equity 
36Each portfolio’s market value is set to $100 at the end of 
1950. For all three formulas, spendable amounts are calcu -
lated, as described in the text, as of 31 December of each 
year. The money is spent in the following year, but that 
spending is deflated by the increase in the CPI during that 
following year.portfolio, whereas the Market-Value Spending 
Rule uses a 70% equity/30% bond portfolio, 
rebalanced quarterly.
The balanced portfolio used for the Market-
Value Spending Rule might seem, at least by 
spend-down investor standards, to be less risky 
because of its 30% allocation to bonds, yet it 
generated for its owner a much more volatile 
stream of spendable cash. In contrast, the all-
equity portfolio used for the two Cash-Flow 
Spending Rules generated more stable cash 
flows. What does the term risk mean in an 
endowment context? I contend that one defini -
tion of risk for endowments is the possibility of 
declining cash flows. The Cash-Flow Spending 
Rules generated less risky results than the 
Market-Value Spending Rule.
As illustrated here, spending rules based on 
the underlying cash-generating capacity of 
an endowment portfolio, rather than on its 
market value, produced more stable results. FIGURE 4.  THREE SPENDING RULES COMPARED
Annual Spending (Real Dollars, 1950 Market V alue = $100)
15
10
5
0
50 70 60 80 90 2000 10
5% of Market V alue 130% of Dividends 65% of EarningsA CAsh-Flow FoCus F oR endowments And tRusts
16  |  CFA Institute Research FoundationFurthermore, a 100% equity portfolio should 
theoretically generate in the future (and has 
generated in the past) greater returns than the 
70%/30% mix.
Figure 5  further supports the claim that the 
rules based on dividends and earnings have 
produced more stable spending. Given that an 
ideal spending rule would generate a stream of 
spendable cash that perfectly follows inflation, 
this graph shows the degree to which these 
three spending rules—that is, spend 5% of mar -
ket values with a 70%/30% asset mix, spend 
130% of dividends with all equities, or spend 
65% of earnings with all equities—drifted away 
from their perfect inflation-tracking trendlines. 
The clear loser is the Market-Value Spending 
Rule. The clear winner is the Cash-Flow 
Earnings Rule.For readers who prefer numbers over graphs, 
the gaps between the annual cash flows gen -
erated by these spending rules and a perfect 
inflation-following trendline (the 0% line in 
Figure 5) are as follows.
Average 
Annual Gap
market-Value spending Rule 
(70% equities/30% bonds)24.5%
Cash-Flow dividends Rule 
(100% equities) 13.5%
Cash-Flow e arnings Rule  
(100% equities)  7.9%
For institutions that value stable spending, basing 
spending on market values does not make sense.FIGURE 5.   ANNUAL DRIFT FROM TRENDLINE FOR THREE 
SPENDING RULES
Drift fr om Tr endline (%, Real 1950 Dollars)
80
40
–400
–80
50 70 60 80 90 2000 10
Market V alue CF-Dividends CF-Earnings
Note:  CF-dividends = Cash-Flow dividends Rule; CF-e arnings = Cash-Flow e arnings Rule.A CAsh-Flow FoCus F oR endowments And tRusts
CFA Institute Research Foundation  |  17 Applying the Cash-Flow 
Spending Rules to other 
core asset classes
The same logic used to create spending formulas 
based on S&P 500 dividends and earnings could 
be applied to other cash-generating asset classes 
as well, although the devil is in the details. For 
example, the dividend-based formula says to 
spend 130% of the dividends paid by the S&P 
500. What percentage should be applied to UK 
equities? Or to eurozone equities? What about 
the cash flows from American real estate invest -
ment trusts (REITs)? And so on. These are fer -
tile grounds for future research.
I will venture an answer to perhaps the easi -
est question: What spending rate should an 
American endowment investor, whose endow -
ment is predominantly invested in US equities, 
apply to non-US equities in the fund? A reason -
able answer might be to apply the same spend -
ing formula to the non-US equities as to the US 
equities—that is, to be agnostic and assume that 
the long-term real total returns from the non-
US portion of the endowment may be approxi -
mately the same as for the US portion.
Investing in non-core 
asset classes
To repeat a point made earlier, institutions using 
one of the Cash-Flow Spending Rules will nor -
mally focus on those asset classes that generate 
growing streams of cash. Following the lead of 
Swensen (2005), I have called these “core asset 
c l a s s e s .”
Because diversification among individual secu -
rities is beneficial, diversification among sources 
of return should be beneficial as well. Thus, 
for endowments to diversify among core asset classes by, say, owning both equities and real 
estate is rational.
These days, however, large and sophisticated 
endowment funds often invest in other, non-
core asset classes. How can non-core assets be 
integrated into the new picture?
When endowment investors diversify beyond 
just the traditional core asset classes, they 
seem to have two reasons for doing so. The first 
reason is to minimize market value declines 
because when spending is based on market val -
ues, a drop in market values will cause a drop in 
spending. For this reason, investors seek assets 
whose returns are negatively or at least weakly 
correlated with core asset classes such as equi -
ties. However, if these investors were to adopt a 
spending rule that is indifferent to market val -
ues, then this reason for investing in non-core 
asset classes would disappear.
The second reason to diversify beyond core 
assets is to seek higher returns. Higher returns 
are always desirable, which is why they are sel -
dom achievable. A few large universities have 
earned better-than-market returns for many 
years, in part through investing in non-core 
assets, and some university trustees believe that 
non-core asset classes may continue to provide 
superior returns.37 Non-core assets make sense 
in endowment portfolios when the expected 
returns from these assets seem greater than the 
expected returns of the core asset classes that 
the non-core assets would replace. But non-core 
assets can be riskier than core assets and should, 
therefore, be used only to a limited extent and 
only when the risk seems worthwhile.
Endowed institutions may hold core assets, such 
as equities and real estate, for decades or even 
centuries, but these institutions’ incursions into 
37For more on this point, see Ang, Ayala, and Goetzmann 
(2014).A CAsh-Flow FoCus F oR endowments And tRusts
18  |  CFA Institute Research Foundationnon-core asset classes are likely to be of limited 
duration.
What spending rate should one apply to non-
core assets? One answer is to apply the same 
rate used for the asset class from which the cap -
ital came. This is appropriate if the source (core) 
and replacement (non-core) assets have roughly 
the same risk. If the non-core asset, over the 
time it is held, generates a higher total return 
than the core asset from which its capital came, 
then the endowed institution will have gained 
from this venture outside the core asset classes. 
If not, the institution will have fallen behind.
Further Issues
In this section, I discuss other important issues: 
what the anchor should be for the Anchor & 
Pointer Spending Rule, what can be done to sta -
bilize spending distributions, and what spend -
ing rule to choose.
Setting an anchor for the Anchor 
& Pointer Spending Rule
When using the Anchor & Pointer Spending 
Rule, what should the beginning spending 
rate—the anchor—be? Here is where the Cash-
Flow Spending Rules can help. The Cash-Flow 
Earnings Rule and the Cash-Flow Dividends 
Rule do a better job of indicating proper current 
spending levels than the Market-Value Spending 
Rule does. Earlier, I explained that the Anchor & 
Pointer Spending Rule was incomplete because 
it does not offer any guidance for setting an 
anchor. With assistance from the Cash-Flow 
Spending Rules, the Anchor & Pointer Spending 
Rule becomes complete.
The forced year-to-year stability that the Anchor 
& Pointer Spending Rule provides can cause an 
institution’s spending to deviate over time from 
the underlying fecundity of that institution’s assets. After an institution has used the Anchor 
& Pointer Spending Rule for several years, that 
institution can lean on the Cash-Flow Spending 
Rules to determine how much actual spending 
has drifted away from its theoretically optimum 
level. When to reset the anchor—that is, when 
to ratchet spending downward or upward—will 
remain a judgment call. But the call will be easier 
to make if trustees understand the natural cash-
generating capacity of their endowments’ assets.
At institutions for which stable payouts are a top 
priority, use of the Anchor & Pointer Spending 
Rule would make sense. But the occasional 
application of one of the Cash-Flow Spending 
Rules would provide a useful reality check to 
ensure spending does not drift far out of line.
Smoothing distributions
While basing spending on market values can 
clearly lead to wild payout swings (as shown in 
Figure 2), the other rules described here are not 
perfect. They will lead to spending swings that 
should be less extreme than those caused by the 
Market-Value Spending Rule, but those swings 
may still be greater than most institutions can 
tolerate.
Although the Anchor & Pointer Spending Rule 
will stabilize distributions over the short term, it 
will not stabilize them in the long term, except 
when the fecundity of an institution’s endowment 
happens to grow at the same pace as the pointer. 
In the more likely case in which this is not true, 
changes to distributions will presumably take 
place in a stepped manner. For example, an insti -
tution might determine that its distributions need 
to shrink by, say, 20% to better match its endow -
ment’s fecundity. Such a decline could be phased 
in over a few years rather than all at once.
Adopters of the Cash-Flow Earnings Rule should 
experience somewhat stable distributions from A CAsh-Flow FoCus F oR endowments And tRusts
CFA Institute Research Foundation  |  19 one year to the next thanks to that formula’s 
15-year smoothing, whereas adopters of the 
Cash-Flow Dividends Rule will have a slightly 
bumpier ride. In both cases, however, occasional 
spending declines are possible and even likely. 
What can one do to smooth spending further?
One possibility would be to self-insure, by set -
ting aside some capital that could be consumed 
to reduce or pave over any potential spend -
ing declines. This approach is described in 
Section V.
Endowment investors may be able to shelter 
themselves from life’s minor squalls but not 
from its major storms. Smooth spending will 
not always be achievable.
Which rule should you use?
Because of their links to asset cash flows and 
because of their greater stability, either of the 
Cash-Flow Spending Rules offered here—the 
Cash-Flow Dividends Rule or the Cash-Flow 
Earnings Rule—would seem to be a good choice 
to guide spending decisions. And because 
these rules can also help set an anchor for the 
Anchor & Pointer Spending Rule, this latter 
rule seems useful as well. Given these three 
options, which would seem to be the best? The 
Cash-Flow Earnings Rule may produce the most 
stable spending; the Cash-Flow Dividends Rule 
is slightly simpler to use; the Anchor & Pointer 
Spending Rule is perhaps the simplest one of 
all, but trustees using it will have to look back at 
one of the Cash-Flow Spending Rules from time 
to time. It is a judgment call.
IV. CHANGE THE SPENDING 
RATES?
Now that the Cash-Flow Dividends Rule and the 
Cash-Flow Earnings Rule have been described and 130% of dividends and 65% of earnings have 
been used as spending rates in the calculations, 
the question becomes whether those particular 
rates are out of date.
“The investor who says, ‘This time is different, ’ 
when in fact it’s virtually a repeat of an earlier 
situation, has uttered among the four most 
costly words in the annals of investing. ” So wrote 
John Templeton more than 25 years ago.38 Yet 
the world occasionally does change.
The 125%-of-dividends spending rate first pro -
posed by Garland in 1989 (and subsequently 
revised to 130% in 2005) was based on a back -
test from 1951 through 1987. Real-time results 
in the 30 years since 1987 have been good, as 
has been shown here.
These 125% and 130% spending rates were based 
on dividend growth that had been rather con -
stant since 1950. Recently, however, dividend 
growth has accelerated. The year 2005 seems to 
be the inflection point for this change.39 Over 
the long run, from 1950 through 2005, real divi -
dends per share grew by 0.90% per year.40 But 
from 2005 through 2017, real dividends grew by 
4.79% per year. This abrupt change in the divi -
dend growth rate is apparent in Figure 6 .
38Sir John Templeton, “16 Rules for Investment Success, ” 
World Monitor: The Christian Science Monitor Monthly  
(1993). A reprint of the original article can be found at 
www.franklintempleton.com/forms-literature/download/
TL-R16 . Sir John Templeton was a very successful mutual 
fund manager who died in 2008.
39The S&P 500 divisor is a rough measure of that index’s 
total shares outstanding. If aggregate S&P 500 dividends 
remain unchanged during a particular period but the 
divisor shrinks, then per-share dividends grow. The divi -
sor peaked during the third quarter of 2004 and has been 
slowly shrinking ever since. Thus, 2005 seems to be the 
inflection point for the acceleration in per-share dividend 
growth described here.
40This and the following number are least-square best fits, 
calculated using Microsoft Excel’s LOGEST function.A CAsh-Flow FoCus F oR endowments And tRusts
20  |  CFA Institute Research FoundationPer-share earnings growth has also accelerated 
since 2005. Why these changes?
One cause is a surge in corporate profitability. 
During the great American bull market of the 
1980s and 1990s, for example, corporate profits 
averaged only 8.1% of GDP . In contrast, from 
2010 through 2017, profits averaged 11.8% of 
GDP—almost 50% higher.41
Another cause of the surge in per-share divi -
dends and earnings has been a shrinkage in 
shares outstanding due to buybacks. The dollar 
volume of buybacks has been enormous. During 
the past several years, dollars devoted to buy -
backs among S&P 500 companies have exceeded 
the amounts paid out as dividends. And dur -
ing the four most recent years (2014–2017), 
41These data come from US Bureau of Economic Analysis 
Tables 1.17.5 and 1.12.dividends plus buybacks have exceeded those 
companies’ total profits.42,43
Given the recent faster per-share dividend and 
earnings growth, are the 130%-of-dividends and 
65%-of-earnings spending rates too low today? 
To try to answer that question, I will first exam -
ine stock buybacks and then consider the surge 
in profits.
To determine how much future spending rates 
should be increased based only on buybacks, we 
need to consider two difficult questions. First, 
how much benefit have buybacks provided to 
endowment investors, as opposed to spend-
down investors with their finite time horizons? 
42The numbers for 2014 through 2017, in trillions, are as 
follows: dividends, $1.55; buybacks, $2.18; dividends plus 
buybacks, $3.73; “as reported” earnings, $3.43. Source: 
Standard & Poor’s.
43For a recent paper on buybacks, see Straehl and Ibbotson 
(2017).FIGURE 6.   S&P 500 REAL DIVIDEND GROWTH, 1950–2005 
AND 2005–2017
1Annual S&P  Dividends (Real Dollars, with 1950 Set to $1)
4.79% Annual Gr owth Rate
2005 to 2017
0.90% Annual Gr owth Rate
1950 to 20054
3
2
0
50 70 60 80 90 2000 10
Annual Dividend Long-T erm Tr endlineA CAsh-Flow FoCus F oR endowments And tRusts
CFA Institute Research Foundation  |  21 Second, will buybacks persist, or are they just a 
passing fad?
Regarding the first question—how much 
benefit?—a simple answer is not as much as the 
dollar volume would suggest. Common sense 
says that a corporation spending $1 million to 
buy back shares when those shares are cheap is 
benefiting its remaining shareholders by more 
than $1 million. And common sense also says 
that when a corporation spends that amount 
to buy back expensive shares, it is benefiting 
remaining shareholders by less than $1 million. 
Share buybacks are more extensive in high mar -
kets (because that is when corporations are flush 
with cash) than in low markets. Thus, buybacks 
as a whole are less valuable on a per-dollar basis 
than dividends. How much less valuable is still 
unknown. Determining when a given share of 
stock is cheap rather than expensive is difficult.
The second question—will buybacks persist?—is 
tougher to answer yet probably more important. 
If mean reversion causes today’s high corporate 
profit margins to shrink, buybacks are likely to 
shrink faster than dividends. Dividend payouts 
are quasi-contractual in nature because corpo -
rations are loath to cut them. But buybacks are 
episodic: They come and go without harm to 
a company’s reputation. Dividends are sticky; 
buybacks are not.
Buybacks are likely to continue to some degree, 
as long as executive compensation is based on 
the price of company shares and on per-share 
earnings and, in particular, as long as executives 
are compensated with stock options. Options 
are leveraged bets on stock prices. Executives 
holding options can be insensitive to the prices 
their companies pay for shares because their 
personal incentives conflict with what is best 
for other shareholders. If they received options 
yesterday at already high prices, they have an 
incentive to use corporate cash to drive prices even higher tomorrow. And this problem feeds 
into the problem that buybacks are more preva -
lent in high markets than in low ones.
And then we have the matter of the recent bulge 
in corporate profits. The late Peter Bernstein 
was fond of saying that reversion to the mean 
does happen—but the mean is constantly 
changing.44 The last great bulge in US corporate 
profits happened during the mid-1960s and led 
to the bulge in dividend payouts that is shown in 
Figure 6. As is apparent there,45 the subsequent 
decline in profit margins led to a decline in real 
dividends. If today’s high profits revert to their 
mean—whatever that happens to be—dividends 
may stop growing or even decline.
Is the recent dividend and buyback behavior 
sustainable? I doubt it. Will the future be differ -
ent? That is likely. I have failed to answer here 
the first buyback question (how much benefit?), 
and the second question (will buybacks persist?) 
is unanswerable. In addition, the profit mar -
gin question (will margins revert and to what 
level?) is also unanswerable. Yet some attempt 
to answer is necessary if—as seems likely—the 
future is destined to be at least slightly different 
from the past.
The greater danger is a decline in profit 
margins—that is, of reversion to the historical 
mean, which is lower than the current level. A 
decline in profits could have a twofold effect: 
Dividends (or at least dividend growth) might 
decline, and buybacks might decline at an even 
faster pace than dividends. The faster dividend 
and earnings growth rates experienced since 
2005 suggest that higher spending rates might 
be reasonable today. But applying higher per -
centage spending rates to what are already 
sharply higher dividends and earnings would 
44Personal communication.
45This will become even more apparent in Figure 8.A CAsh-Flow FoCus F oR endowments And tRusts
22  |  CFA Institute Research Foundationbe double counting. For now, 130% of dividends 
and 65% of earnings still seem to be the best 
lodestars for endowment investors.
V. INTERGENERATIONAL EQUITY
Perpetual endowment funds should be man -
aged in a way that favors neither the present at 
the expense of the future nor the future at the 
expense of the present. Yale University econo -
mist James Tobin (1974, p. 427) expressed this 
idea succinctly:
The trustees of an endowment 
institution are the guardians of 
the future against the claims of the 
present. Their task is to preserve 
equity among generations.
This balancing act is called intergenerational 
equity . Achieving intergenerational equity is a 
daunting task.
How does one tell if it has been achieved? The 
nearly universal technique for evaluating inter -
generational equity has been to look at real 
market values. For example, if the market value 
of an American endowment fund in 1976 was, 
say, $10 million and if its value in 1987—by 
which time the cost of living had doubled—was 
$20  million, then its trustees presumably had 
been intergenerationally equitable. And if its 
value in 1987 was significantly more or less than 
$20 million, they presumably had not.
This method of evaluating intergenerational 
equity is meaningless and a waste of time.
Suppose that the market value of an endowment 
today is T. Suppose that at the close of business 
tomorrow, the market value is 99% of T. Have 
the endowment’s trustees failed to be equitable? 
Suppose that two months later, its value is only 
90% of T. Again, have they failed? What about 
looking out six months instead of just two?Good answers to the previous questions, in the 
same order, would be “That is a silly question, ” 
“That is another silly question, ” and “Six months 
is still irrelevant. ” But at what point does a com -
parison of real market values become relevant? 
One year? Five years? Ten years? The correct 
answer is never.
Trustees might understandably believe that 
maintaining market values matters. They have 
an obligation to preserve their endowments’ 
capital for the very long term, and the common 
way to think about capital these days is in terms 
of its market value.
But this viewpoint is yet another manifesta -
tion of what I earlier called the fetishization of 
market values. The overriding objective of many 
endowment funds is to generate spendable 
cash flows in perpetuity. A proper evaluation of 
intergenerational equity must consider how well 
endowments have maintained their ability to 
generate spendable cash.
Earlier I introduced the term fecundity , which 
I defined, in an endowment context, as the 
amount of cash that a fund can distribute each 
year without threatening its capacity to make 
similar distributions, in inflation-adjusted dol -
lars, in the future. The true measure of intergen -
erational equity is whether an endowment has 
maintained its capacity to generate spendable 
cash—its fecundity—over time.
Spending rules provide estimates of endow -
ment fund fecundity. The best method to evalu -
ate fecundity is to apply one of the Cash-Flow 
Spending Rules, looking either at dividends 
or earnings. Although the two rules produce 
roughly similar results, because the Cash-Flow 
Dividends Rule is simpler, I will apply it here to 
look at the fecundity of one trust fund over an 
extended period.A CAsh-Flow FoCus F oR endowments And tRusts
CFA Institute Research Foundation  |  23 I discussed asset fecundity earlier, but as a 
refresher, here is a brief summary.
According to the Cash-Flow Dividends Rule, the 
fecundity of a portfolio of American common 
stocks has been approximately equal to 130% of 
the trailing dividend yield of the S&P 500.
The fecundity of non-US common stocks is a 
question for which I am hoping future research 
may provide an answer. In the meantime, at least 
for American investors, who presumably have 
only a fraction of their equity capital invested 
overseas, 130% of S&P 500 dividends will serve 
as a reasonable stand-in.
The fecundity of traditional (fixed interest rate) 
bonds is their real interest. Ideally, this would 
mean today’s average yield for the bond portfo -
lio less tomorrow’s inflation. In practice, a good 
proxy for tomorrow’s inflation is past annual -
ized inflation averaged over the previous three 
years. Alternatively, the real interest rate can be 
read off the TIPS yield curve.
A Real-Life Example
Using market values to evaluate intergen -
erational equity can provide wildly misleading 
results, particularly during prolonged bull or 
bear markets. I will illustrate this point with 
the history of a real-life fund during the great 
American bull market of the 1980s and 1990s 
and during the years that followed.
The example is a trust fund with which I am 
personally familiar.46 This is a very-long-lived 
taxable trust for the benefit of a large family. 
The trust has been managed like an endowment 
fund. Its primary objective has been to provide 
stable distributions for the family as a whole 
that keep pace with inflation over the very long 
46Full disclosure: I managed this trust’s assets from 1995 
to 2011.term, and thus, the trust has sought to be inter -
generationally equitable.
I will call this the Smith Family Trust. It has 
been managed with the same objectives, the 
same strategy, and essentially the same asset 
mix since 1980. The analysis will begin at the 
end of that year and follow the trust’s progress 
for 35 years through the end of 2015.47
The trust had 80%–90% of its principal invested 
in equities throughout this period.48 At the 
beginning, in 1980, the trust’s equities were 
almost solely US equities. Over time, REITs 
and non-US equities seeped into the portfolio, 
and by 2015, they constituted roughly 30% of 
the total. I will assume that the fecundity of the 
entire equity portfolio equaled that of an equiv -
alent dollar amount invested in the S&P 500. For 
the calculations, I will use the simple 130%-of-
dividends formula mentioned earlier. Therefore, 
for the trust’s equities, the fecundity at the end 
of each year, in nominal dollars, equaled
(Year-end equity market value  
 ÷ Year-end S&P 500 market value)  
 × (S&P 500 four-quarter trailing dividend)  
 × 130%.
The remaining 10%–20% of the trust portfo -
lio was invested in very high-quality municipal 
bonds. I will assume that the fecundity of the 
municipal bonds equaled their real yields—that 
is, their nominal yields less inflation. (The trust 
used tax-exempt municipal bonds because it is 
taxable; tax-exempt endowments typically use 
47Most graphs in this article run through 2017. I stopped 
the Smith Family Trust’s history at the end of 2015 because 
the trust went through some restructuring in 2016.
48Investment policy for this trust called for a fixed dollar 
amount to be invested in bonds, rather than a fixed per -
centage amount. The percentage allocation to equities was, 
therefore, allowed to swing up and down with the market.A CAsh-Flow FoCus F oR endowments And tRusts
24  |  CFA Institute Research FoundationTreasury or corporate bonds for the same pur -
pose, but the principle is the same.)
The municipal bond portfolio was very highly 
diversified; at year-end 1980, for example, it held 
several dozen issues. I will simplify matters by 
using the then-current yield of the Bloomberg 
Barclays Municipal Index (BBMI) as a proxy.
I will declare that the real yield of the trust’s 
bond portfolio was the year-end BBMI yield 
minus inflation. A common practice in this situ -
ation is to use recent past inflation as a stand-in 
for future inflation. And because inflation can 
be volatile, multiyear averaging is useful; I used 
three-year averages. I define the fecundity (in 
nominal dollars) of the trust’s municipal bonds 
at each year-end to be
(Year-end BBMI yield) – (Annualized  
 CPI change over previous three years)  
 × (Market value of the bond portfolio).
By applying these simple formulas and convert -
ing the nominal-dollar results to real dollars by 
dividing by the CPI, I have plotted in Figure 7  
the annual fecundity of the Smith Family Trust 
from 1980 through 2015. The calculations are 
shown in Appendix A, available as online sup -
plemental material at https://www.cfainstitute.
org/en/research/foundation/2019/cash-flow-
focus-endowments-trusts .49 I have set the aver -
age fecundity over this interval to 100. What 
matters here is not one particular year’s results 
but, rather, the trend. If fecundity had drifted 
downward over this 35-year period, then pre -
sumably, the trustee had distributed too much, 
and if it had drifted upward, presumably too 
little. I have also plotted on the graph the real 
market value of the trust, with the 1980 starting 
value set to 100. Here are the results.
49To protect the Smith family’s privacy, the numbers in the 
appendix have been scaled downward slightly.Given the great bull market of the 1980s and 
1990s, that the real market value of the Smith 
Family Trust grew so much should be no sur -
prise. At the end, in 2015, it was almost three 
times what it had been at the beginning. Thus, 
using the traditional measure of intergenera -
tional equity—looking at changes in real market 
values—suggests that the trustee favored later 
generations by a huge margin.
However, the graph shows that according to the 
measure that really matters—the fund’s distrib -
utable cash flows—the trust fund’s fecundity 
was essentially unchanged during the entire 
period. The overseers of this endowment-like 
trust fund were intergenerationally equitable.
Dividends and real bond yields are not perfect 
measures of fecundity—they are simply much 
better measures than market values. Here, 
the calculated fecundity represented only an 
informed estimate of the Smith Family Trust’s 
true fecundity, but informed estimates are as 
good as one can get. As yardsticks for evaluat -
ing intergenerational equity, real market values 
provide numbers that are precise but irrelevant, 
whereas these fecundity calculations provide 
numbers that are approximately right and quite 
relevant.
Evaluating intergenerational equity by looking 
at asset fecundity, rather than asset market val -
ues, results in much more meaningful answers.
Insuring the Distributions
Most investors diversify their holdings, follow -
ing the popular adage to not put all your eggs in 
one basket.
Part of the value of diversification comes from 
lessening the probability and magnitude of 
adverse outcomes. Both spend-down investors 
and endowment investors own bonds for this A CAsh-Flow FoCus F oR endowments And tRusts
CFA Institute Research Foundation  |  25 reason. Bonds provide insurance against equity 
bear markets. As with any insurance, buying 
bonds has an opportunity cost—in this case, 
lower expected total returns—but bonds can 
provide a payoff when other investments do not.
I have proposed here that endowment investors 
focus more on cash flows than on market val -
ues. For beneficiaries of the Smith Family Trust, 
the safety and stability of the trust’s distribu -
tions mattered more than the market value of 
the trust’s assets. The trustee invested almost all 
of the trust’s capital in dividend-paying equities 
to provide growing distributions for the trust’s 
beneficiaries. Then, the trustee chose to insure 
those payouts, at least to some degree, by invest -
ing the remaining capital in high-quality munic -
ipal bonds. The bond portfolio was intended to 
insure the trust’s payout stream. If the trust’s 
dividend intake were to decline by any signifi -
cant degree (e.g., during a severe recession), 
then the trustee could liquidate some bonds and distribute the proceeds to the trust beneficiaries 
to compensate, in part or in whole, for the divi -
dend shortfall.50
I mentioned earlier that although dividends 
are more stable than market values and earn -
ings, they are nevertheless not perfectly stable. 
Figure 8  provides a rough answer to the ques -
tion that matters here—namely, How large 
and how long might dividend declines be in 
the future?—by showing how severe they have 
been in the past. I refer to these dividend short -
falls as potholes , and Figure 8 shows how deep 
and wide the potholes have been. The largest 
potholes of the past century came during the 
Great Depression and World War II. Dividends 
peaked in 1930 and did not surpass that peak, in 
real dollars, until 1956. If the trust had paid out 
$100 in distributions during the peak dividend 
50Municipal bonds made sense here because the trust was 
taxable. For tax-exempt endowments, taxable bonds would 
be better and US Treasury securities might be best.FIGURE 7.   SMITH FAMILY TRUST: MARKET VALUE 
AND FECUNDITY
Real 1980 Dollars
400
300
200
100
0
1980 1990 2000 2010
Market V alue (1980 = 100) Fecundity (A verage = 100)A CAsh-Flow FoCus F oR endowments And tRusts
26  |  CFA Institute Research Foundationyear of 1930, then the trustee would have had to 
liquidate bonds worth approximately 6.7 times 
that amount, or $670, to fill the pothole that 
followed.
Investors actually faced two serious dividend 
potholes during the early 20th century, the 
larger being the one just mentioned and the 
smaller being the result of recessions in 1918–
1919 and 1920–1921. Filling both of these back-
to-back potholes would have required setting 
aside $1,020 for every $100 of peak dividends. 
That much insurance would have been quite 
expensive. Partly because of the expense and 
partly in hopes that better oversight of the US 
economy these days might make future down -
turns less severe than in the distant past, the 
Smith Family Trust’s overseers decided to only 
partially insure the fund’s payout. They set aside 
in a bond portfolio an amount equal to seven 
and a half times the then-current distributions 
to the trust’s beneficiaries. Each year, if the trust 
increased its distributions, the overseers would have to purchase a few more bonds to keep the 
“insurance” fully funded.
Because this self-insurance fund was estab -
lished in 1980, the only significant pothole the 
trust has experienced is the deep but brief one 
during the financial crisis of 2008–2009. To fill 
that pothole, the trustee sold 4.3% of the trust’s 
municipal bonds, representing 0.8% of the 
trust’s total capital, and added that cash to the 
diminished amounts that were coming in via 
dividends. As a result, during and immediately 
after the crisis, the trust was able to maintain 
its beneficiary distributions in nominal (but not 
real) dollars. However, filling the pothole meant 
the trust exited that period with 99.2% of the 
capital it had had at the start. This insurance 
was not free. In contrast, endowed institutions 
that base spending on market values often buy 
indirect insurance to protect their market val -
ues, by investing in return-dampening assets, 
such as market-neutral funds and hedge funds, 
and the cost of this indirect insurance—in the 
form of lower returns—is not free, either.FIGURE 8.   FOUR “DIVIDEND POTHOLES”: MAJOR DECLINES 
IN REAL DIVIDENDS
Dividends, S&P  Composite Stock Index (Log Scale, Real 2017 Dollars)
64
32
16
8
4
2
1
1901 31 11 21 41 51 71 81 2001 11 61 91Area = 3.5×
Peak Dividend1920s Hole1931–1955 Hole1967–1990 Hole2009–2012
Hole
Area = 6.7×
Peak DividendArea = 3.3×
Peak DividendArea = 0.7×
Peak Dividend
Sources:  Robert shiller’s website; Bureau of labor statistics.A CAsh-Flow FoCus F oR endowments And tRusts
CFA Institute Research Foundation  |  27 Intergenerational Equity 
Is Not Guaranteed
In 1830, a Massachusetts court gave birth to 
what was known in the United States as the 
Prudent Man Rule. (Today, its direct descen -
dent is the Prudent Investor Rule.) In that 
court’s legal opinion, Justice Samuel Putnam 
wrote, “Do what you will, the capital is at 
hazard. ”51
The overseers of the Smith Family Trust did 
several things right during the years from 1980 
through 2015. But the success of that trust was 
the result of many factors, of which only a few 
were under the overseers’ control.
The most important uncontrollable factor was 
economic growth. The American and global 
economies grew during this period, and reces -
sions for the most part were brief and mild. In 
addition, the rule of law and good corporate 
governance survived in most developed nations 
and even spread into a few other nations. And 
finally, as always, luck played some part.
A vital premise underlying the strategy of the 
Smith Family Trust was that the global economy 
would survive, and survive it did. But the trust’s 
success was the result of the aforementioned 
factors plus the efforts of millions of workers, 
from Seattle to Stockholm to Shanghai, whose 
hard work created the profits that created the 
dividends that led to the trust distributions on 
which the Smith family has fed. Setting appro -
priate objectives, choosing an appropriate strat -
egy, and managing spending reasonably well 
were not guarantors of success. The capital will 
always be at hazard.
51Harvard College v. Amory (1830) 26 Mass (9 Pick) 446. 
This reference comes courtesy of Wikipedia.VI. CONCLUSION
The overriding objective of most very-long-lived 
endowment funds is to provide, over the long 
term, stable amounts of spendable cash that keep 
pace with inflation. Given this need to produce 
spendable cash, endowments have historically 
gravitated toward assets that themselves generate 
cash—toward what I have called core assets.
The spendable-cash-generating capacity of 
these core assets—their fecundity—is a func -
tion of profits (in the case of corporate equities), 
net rents (in the case of real estate), or the net-
of-expenses revenues from other asset classes, 
such as farmland and timberland. Market val -
ues matter when these assets are purchased and 
sold, but otherwise, market values matter very 
little, if at all.
Basing spending on market values is less useful 
than basing spending on the fecundity of the 
underlying assets. Using large-capitalization 
US equities as an example, I have shown how 
to apply two related spending rules that are 
closely linked to asset fecundity. The rules I have 
offered—the Cash-Flow Spending Rules—pro -
vide the following advantages.
First, they combine the strengths of two current 
spending rules. The Cash-Flow Spending Rules 
encourage a focus on cash-generating core asset 
classes, such as equities and real estate—as does 
the Default Spending Rule. In addition, the 
Cash-Flow Spending Rules free spending from 
being rigidly bound to cash flows and allow 
trustees to invest in non-core asset classes with -
out a spending penalty—both positive features 
of the Market-Value Spending Rule.
Second, the Cash-Flow Spending Rules free 
trustees from fretting about market values 
and allow them to focus instead on a much 
more important issue—the current and future A CAsh-Flow FoCus F oR endowments And tRusts
28  |  CFA Institute Research Foundationfecundity of their assets. Risk no longer means 
volatility of returns but, rather, means threats to 
current and future cash flows.
The simpler of the new rules—the Cash-Flow 
Dividends Rule—is useful for quickly evaluating 
the reasonableness of an institution’s current 
spending rate. It is also useful for evaluating 
intergenerational equity, a task for which mar -
ket value comparisons fail to work.
The more complex rule—the Cash-Flow 
Earnings Rule—is the better one for answering 
the fundamental endowment question, which is 
how much an institution can spend.
Although the Anchor & Pointer Spending Rule 
is attractive because of its self-imposed stable 
spending, it is incomplete without markers 
to indicate an appropriate current spending 
rate and to indicate when actual spending has 
strayed from its proper rate. Here, the Cash-
Flow Spending Rules can help.
These two cash-flow rules provide an additional 
ancillary benefit. Investors who are saving for 
retirement have no choice: They must worry 
about market values because of the time-lim -
ited nature of the game. In contrast, perpetual 
endowment investors should worry much more 
about the fundamental drivers of their portfo -
lios’ returns, meaning (in the case of equities) 
corporate profits over the very long term—
not just over the next year or 2 or 10 or 20. 
Endowment investors should worry about the 
political health and economic prosperity of the 
nations in which they invest. Endowment inves -
tors should hope for good governments, strong 
property rights, good laws and regulations, and 
high levels of social capital. For all these rea -
sons, endowment investors need to be engaged 
citizens.52
52For more on this important subject, see Falk (2016).Finally, although determining an appropriate 
current spending rate is a challenge, the longer-
term challenge for many endowments is treating 
future and current beneficiaries the same—to 
achieve what is known as intergenerational 
equity. Endowment investors who seek inter -
generational equity should ignore market values 
and focus instead on what really matters—the 
cash-generating capacity of their assets.
REFERENCES
Acharya, Shanta, and Elroy Dimson. 2007. 
Endowment Asset Management: Investment 
Strategies in Oxford and Cambridge . Oxford, 
UK: Oxford University Press.
Advisory Committee on Endowment 
Management. 1969. “Managing Educational 
Endowments: Report to the Ford Foundation. ” 
Ford Foundation (August).
Ang, Andrew, Andres Ayala, and William 
N. Goetzmann. 2014. “Investment Beliefs of 
Endowments. ” Columbia Business School 
Research Paper No. 13-72. 
Arnott, Robert D., and Peter L. Bernstein. 2002. 
“What Risk Premium Is Normal?” Financial 
Analysts Journal  58 (2): 64–85.
Credit Suisse Research Institute. 2011. “Credit 
Suisse Global Investment Returns Yearbook 
2011” (February). www.credit-suisse.com/  
corporate/en/research/research-institute/  
publications.html .
Dimson, Elroy, and Christophe Spaenjers. 2014. 
“Investing in Emotional Assets. ” Financial 
Analysts Journal  70 (2): 20–25.
Dobris, Joel C. 2005. “Why Five? The Strange, 
Magnetic, and Mesmerizing Affect of the Five 
Percent Unitrust and Spending Rate on Settlors, 
Their Advisers, and Retirees. ” Real Property, 
Probate, and Trust Journal  40 (1): 39–73.A CAsh-Flow FoCus F oR endowments And tRusts
CFA Institute Research Foundation  |  29 Falk, Michael S. 2016. Let’s All Learn How to 
Fish . . . to Sustain Long-Term Economic Growth . 
Charlottesville, VA: CFA Institute Research 
Foundation.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French. 2002. 
“The Equity Premium. ” Journal of Finance  
57 (2): 637–59.
Garland, James P . 1989. “ A Market-Yield 
Spending Rule for Endowments and Trusts. ” 
Financial Analysts Journal  45 (4): 50–60.
Garland, James P . 2005. “Long-Duration 
Trusts and Endowments. ” Journal of Portfolio 
Management  31 (3): 44–54.
Goetzmann, William N., and Sharon Oster. 2015. 
“Competition among University Endowments. ” 
NBER Working Paper No. 18173.
Gordon, Myron J., and Eli Shapiro. 1956. 
“Capital Equipment Analysis: The Required 
Rate of Profit. ” Management Science   
3 (1): 102–10.
Grinold, Richard C., Kenneth F. Kroner, and 
Laurence B. Siegel. 2011. “ A Supply Model of 
the Equity Premium. ” In Rethinking the Equity 
Risk Premium , edited by P . Brett Hammond, Jr., 
Martin L. Leibowitz, and Laurence B. Siegel. 
Charlottesville, VA: Research Foundation of 
CFA Institute.
Ilmanen, Antti. 2012. Expected Returns on 
Major Asset Classes . Charlottesville, VA: 
Research Foundation of CFA Institute and 
Wiley Global Finance.
Levine, David A. 2011. “Investing for Trusts and 
Their Beneficiaries. ” Paper submitted in relation to a presentation at a New York State Bar 
Association/Columbia University Law School 
symposium titled “Revisiting the Prudent 
Investor in 2011” (23 September).
National Association of College and University 
Business Officers and Commonfund Institute. 
2017. “2017 NACUBO–Commonfund Study of 
Endowments” (February).
Nichols, Donald A. 1971. “ A New Measure 
of Income from Wealth. ” Cowles Foundation 
Discussion Paper No. 321 (November).
Nichols, Donald A. 1974. “The Investment 
Income Formula of the American Economic 
Association. ” American Economic Review   
64 (2): 420–26.
Sedlacek, Verne O., and William F. Jarvis. 2010. 
“Endowment Spending: Building a Stronger 
Policy Framework. ” Commonfund Institute 
(October).
Straehl, Philip U., and Roger G. Ibbotson. 2017. 
“The Long-Run Drivers of Stock Returns: Total 
Payouts and the Real Economy. ” Financial 
Analysts Journal  73 (3): 32–52.
Swensen, David F. 2005. Unconventional 
Success: A Fundamental Approach to Personal 
Investment . New York: Free Press.
Tobin, James. 1974. “What Is Permanent 
Endowment Income?” American Economic 
Review  64 (2): 427–32.
Williams, John Burr. 1938. The Theory of 
Investment Value . Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press.CFA Institute
Research Foundation 
Board of Trustees
2018–2019
Officers and Directors Chair
Ted Aronson, CFA
AJO
Jeffery V. Bailey, CFA*
Tonka Bay, MN
Bill Fung, PhD
Aventura, FL
Diane Garnick
Greenwich, CT
JT Grier, CFA*
Virginia Retirement SystemJoanne Hill
CBOE Vest Financial
George R. Hoguet, CFA
Chesham Investments, LLC
Robert Jenkins, FSIP
London Business School
Joachim Klement, CFA
Fidante Partners
Vikram Kuriyan, PhD, CFA
GWA and Indian School of 
BusinessAaron Low, CFA
LUMIQ 
Diane Nordin, CFA
Concord, MA
Mauro Miranda, CFA
Panda Investimentos AAI Ltda.
Sophie Palmer, CFA
Jarislowsky Fraser
Paul Smith, CFA
CFA Institute
Executive Director
Bud Haslett, CFA
CFA Institute
Gary P. Brinson Director of Research
Laurence B. Siegel
Blue Moon Communications
Associate Research Director
Luis Garcia-Feijóo, CFA, CIPM
Coral Gables, FloridaSecretary
Jessica Lawson
CFA Institute
Treasurer
Kim Maynard
CFA Institute
Research Foundation Review Board*Emeritus
William J. Bernstein
Efficient Frontier Advisors
Elroy Dimson
London Business School
Stephen Figlewski
New York University
William N. Goetzmann
Yale School of Management
Elizabeth R. Hilpman
Barlow Partners, Inc.Paul D. Kaplan, CFA
Morningstar, Inc.
Robert E. Kiernan III
Advanced Portfolio Management
Andrew W. Lo
Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology
Alan Marcus
Boston College
Paul O’Connell
FDO PartnersKrishna Ramaswamy
University of Pennsylvania
Andrew Rudd
Advisor Software, Inc.
Stephen Sexauer
Allianz Global Investors Solutions
Lee R. Thomas
Pacific Investment Management 
CompanyAvailable online at www.cfainstitute.org9781944 960773ISBN 978-1-944960-77-3